Re-add an AWS-specific architecture article, rewritten from Vintage to CAPI (#2752)
giantswarm/docs: src/content/overview/architecture/aws/index.md

---
title: AWS architecture
description: How architecture and cluster setup looks like with the AWS cloud provider specifically
weight: 30
menu:
  principal:
    parent: overview-architecture
    identifier: overview-architecture-aws
aliases:
  - /basics/aws-architecture/
last_review_date: 2025-07-09
user_questions:
  - Why does Giant Swarm need access to my AWS account?
  - What isolation layers are available when using Giant Swarm on AWS?
  - What are best practices for workload segregation on AWS?
  - Will my AWS clusters autoscale?
owner:
  - https://github.com/orgs/giantswarm/teams/team-phoenix
---

This details the AWS-specific architecture of the Giant Swarm platform. Please make sure you've read about the [overall platform architecture]({{< relref "/overview/architecture" >}}).

## Management cluster, workload clusters and workload separation via AWS accounts

> The management cluster runs the software needed to create and manage workload clusters, among other operators. Generally, you only need one management cluster, but you can also have multiple if you want to separate by region, or development vs. production, for example.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The management cluster runs the software needed to create and manage workload clusters, among other operations. Generally, you only need one management cluster, but you can also have multiple if you want to separate by region, or development vs. production, for example.
```

> The management cluster and its workload clusters can be in the same or in different AWS accounts. If you decide for different accounts, each account needs an IAM role with minimal permissions in order to create cluster resources (VPC, subnets, EC2 instances, etc.). Don't worry ‒ once your first account was set up, Giant Swarm engineers take care of setting up other accounts and updating IAM policies whenever needed (for example: additional permissions for new features). The IAM setup is open source and part of our documentation.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The management cluster and its workload clusters can be in the same or in different AWS accounts. If you decide on different accounts, each account needs an IAM role with minimal permissions in order to create cluster resources (VPC, subnets, EC2 instances, etc.). Don't worry ‒ once your first account is set up, Giant Swarm engineers take care of setting up other accounts and updating IAM policies whenever needed (for example, additional permissions for new features). The IAM setup is open source and part of our documentation.
```

### CAPA clusters running directly on EC2 instances (non-EKS)

![AWS workload cluster architecture](aws-workload-cluster-architecture.webp)

**VPC and subnets:** A cluster is deployed to a separate VPC that is normally automatically created together with the cluster. It is also possible to adopt your existing network when creating a cluster, such as existing VPC, subnets, etc.

**Node pools:** Each pool scales Kubernetes nodes as needed. By default, EC2 auto-scaling groups (ASGs) are used, controlled by cluster-autoscaler. You can provide a minimum and maximum number of workers and the number of nodes will adapt to how many pods need to be scheduled. Alternatively, Karpenter can be used to get more savings by choosing certain instance types depending on current needs in a cluster. The nodes in a pool can have different labels and properties so that you could use them for different purposes, such as having a small pool of very powerful instances on which only a specific, production-critical application is running. You can read more in [AWS Cluster scaling]({{< relref "/tutorials/fleet-management/cluster-management/aws-cluster-scaling" >}}).

> **Networking:** A cluster always runs in a single VPC, and Kubernetes nodes are placed in private subnets, not exposed to the internet, but having internet access through NAT gateways. This is the default and recommended setup in _Cluster API Provider AWS_. If customization is needed, for example to access workloads in another AWS account through a fast connection, that is possible using transit gateways or VPC peering. As an option, Giant Swarm AWS clusters also support placing Kubernetes pod IPs directly on the AWS network (see [Cilium ENI mode]({{< relref "/tutorials/fleet-management/cluster-management/aws-cilium-eni-mode/" >}})) if your network layout requires that. The default, however, is for the Cilium CNI to manage pod IPs in order to support as many as possible.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Networking:** A cluster always runs in a single VPC, and Kubernetes nodes are placed in private subnets, not exposed to the internet, but having internet access through NAT gateways. This is the default and recommended setup in _Cluster API Provider AWS_. If customization is needed, for example to access workloads in another AWS account through a fast connection, that is possible using transit gateways or VPC peering. As an option, Giant Swarm AWS clusters also support placing Kubernetes pod IPs directly on the AWS network (see [Cilium ENI mode]({{< relref "/tutorials/fleet-management/cluster-management/aws-cilium-eni-mode/" >}})) in case your network layout requires it. The default, however, is for the Cilium CNI to manage pod IPs, thereby supporting as many as possible.
```

> **Exposing applications on the internet:** A load balancer (e.g. ELB/NLB/ALB) is placed in the public subnet to balance the request over the different backends.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
**Exposing applications on the internet:** A load balancer (for example, ELB/NLB/ALB) is placed in the public subnet to balance the requests over the different backends.
```
